Hey there, welcome to the Posit Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Heron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12pm US Eastern Time. If
you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I want to go ahead and introduce our featured leaders today
because we have two and they are both keynote at Posit Conf, which is really exciting. So
we have Kieran Healy, Professor of Sociology at Duke University, and we also have Jonathan
McPherson, Software Architect at Posit. Say hi to everybody. I am going to ask Kieran
to go ahead and introduce yourself first. A little bit of background about Kieran and
something you would like to do for fun outside of work.
Hi everyone, and thanks for coming. There's a big crowd here. My name is Kieran Healy.
As Libby said, I teach Sociology at Duke here in North Carolina. I'm originally from Ireland
and I've been using, as I like to say, I've been using R since it was a different letter,
since it was S. Back as a graduate student, I was introduced to it by one of my teachers
and since then it's been sort of the main way that I do data analysis and teach it and
draw pictures with it. And kind of over the years, having just being a user of it, I've
become somebody who also writes about it and tries to teach people how to use it specifically
with data visualization. So that's my background with R.
And anything for fun?
Anything for fun? Being Irish, I'm just naturally averse to those kinds of questions. I restore
old computers. How about that? I build those things that you can see in the background.
I rehabilitate in my basement vintage computers and then occasionally threaten my students
with having them run their their analyses on them whenever they complain about running
out of memory or something like that.
Does it does it pain you to call them vintage?
Because it pains me.
It does, yeah, because that means I'm vintage.
Right. Yeah. I mean, I'm like, well, these are the things I had as a kid.
They can't possibly be vintage.
Wonderful. I'm going to have Jonathan do the same thing.
Jonathan, could you introduce yourself?
Tell us a little bit about you, how you got here and something you like to do for fun.
Yeah. Hey, everybody.
I'm Jonathan. I'm coming at you live from the Seattle area of Washington, where it is
still morning. I still need coffee.
I'm a software engineer and architect at Posit.
I'm not a data scientist, to be clear, but I do make tools for data scientists.
So I was fortunate enough to be one of the early employees at RStudio, now Posit, and
have worked for most of my time here on the RStudio IDE.
If you have not used RStudio, it is one of the first and, in my opinion, still one of
the best IDEs for the R language.
A couple of years ago, I switched gears and helped create a new IDE called Positron,
which kind of takes a lot of the ideas from RStudio and develops them into a bigger,
more ambitious multi-language IDE.
So I'd love to take questions about RStudio, Positron, data science tools, software
engineering and architecture, and so on.
For fun, I am a dad.
I have three kids, so I spend a lot of time with them.
I'm into music. I play the piano.
I read a lot of books. I go through at least a few books a month.
Fiction, nonfiction, everything in between.
And I also ride my bicycle a lot, so that's me.
I go through a lot of books every month, too, and then I tell myself, I don't have time
for anything. I don't have time to read a lot of books.
All right. Well, I wanted to give us a chance to sort of preview both of your
conf talks. This is putting pressure on you because you might not even have your conf
talks done. I have given a talk at conf and I was not ready months before, but
I thought maybe we could do a pseudo abstract for each of you just so that it gives
us all a little bit more context.
Kieran, would you like to go first and talk a little bit about what you plan to talk
about in your keynote?
Sure. Yes. And my talk is certainly not done at this stage.
My talk will be about trustworthy data visualization.
As I said a minute ago, I'm interested in data visualization because it's such a
powerful way to condense and present information, often tremendous amounts of
information, into sort of a compelling and seemingly authoritative, often beautiful
artifact that travels really well, that you can show to people and convince people of
things with. And now, in a way, all of statistics, all of the things that we produce
with data science models and tables and all the rest of it is like that, too.
But visualizations are especially like that, I think, because they strive to be
accessible and seem immediately interpretable.
I mean, that's what we want when we make visualizations.
But it's that power that also makes me kind of suspicious, a little bit suspicious
anyway, of the whole rhetoric that has grown up around them, of their popularity, even
though I do what I can to encourage that popularity myself.
And as I say, the whole kind of language around data visualization from sort of
old stuff like lying with graphs all the way through to more contemporary phrases like
visual storytelling and things, I'm just a little bit suspicious of that.
We want our data visualizations to be compelling and we want them to be convincing.
But we also want them to be trustworthy or we should want that.
And so we can ask, how can we do that?
How can we make trustworthy data visualizations?
And where does our trust in them come from?
How is it sustained?
And I think what I want to argue in the talk is that what we find is that the answer
is not is not really the techniques used in the visualizations themselves or even in
the software used to make them, even though that's made such tremendous strides over
the last 20 or even five or six years, these are very useful and important, but
they're not sufficient. And instead, the trustworthiness that we want depends on a
kind of web of social processes and individual commitments that can't easily be
automated and that we inevitably rely on.
And if those processes break down or those commitments are weak, then it won't matter
how good looking our graphs are or how compelling the stories we seem to tell with
them can be. So that's what the talk is going to be about.
It's a very juicy topic for me.
I love it, especially because I do Tidy Tuesday every week and having 30 minutes to
create a graph, I am frequently going, hmm, well, I got something done, but is it is
this trustworthy? Is this good?
Especially if the information that I'm conveying is something about like health care,
you know, things that are very, very important and not frivolous like Pokemon or D&D
monsters, which it is this week.
All right, everybody, rev up your questions for Kieran about data visualization and
other things that Kieran has mentioned.
Jonathan, how about you?
What is your conf talk going to be about?
So my talk is going to be a little bit of history and a little bit of today and then a
little bit of tomorrow. So kind of one of those time spanning talks.
So like I mentioned in my intro a few minutes ago, I worked at RStudio.
I've been at Posit for quite some time, and so I'm going to reflect a little bit on a
decade of work on RStudio, kind of the principles that have led it to become the
standard data science environment for R.
I'm going to talk a bit about how those same principles developed the basis for
Positron. I'll talk about Positron for quite a bit, and then I'll probably spend a
little bit of time kind of looking to the future and talking about some of the ideas
we have for the future of data science tooling.
Wonderful. I know that we're probably going to have lots of Positron questions.
Well, I want to hop right into Slido questions.
We've got a few here already because Noor asked one that is the exact question that I
wanted to ask. Noor, not a naive question, as you said in Slido.
This is great. Are you available to unmute and ask yours?
Hello.
Yes, I am not fit for visual consumption, but my voice is here.
This is more directed towards Jonathan, and I think it's a naive question, even though
Libby doesn't, but what exactly does a data architect do from your perspective?
And what is your day-to-day like?
Yeah, so what is my day-to-day like?
So I have worked on Positron since really day one.
And so what an architect does in my role is quite a lot of coding and also quite a lot of
fitting pieces together.
So a system as complicated as an IDE has a whole bunch of subsystems.
So if you think about the pieces that compose a complicated data science IDE like
Positron, you have a user interface that displays the console and the graphs and charts
and data grids and your variables viewer and all that stuff.
You have language execution engines like R and Python that are actually performing the
computations and then emitting results.
You have other pieces that are going on.
You have terminals. You have connections to other systems.
These systems will often run in a web browser or in a desktop IDE.
And so an architect's job in many cases is to simply design the way that all those
processes work together to form a cohesive whole.
So in the early days of Positron, I spent quite a lot of time just kind of slotting
pieces in and out to figure out how to build a solid, reliable, robust system that does
all the things we need it to do.
And as the product has matured, my job is to be spending a lot more time actually
writing a lot of middleware and glue code that keeps everything talking to each
other, as well as writing a bunch of stuff that does individual features on the front
end and the back end.
So building UI, building capabilities that connect to R and Python, and then writing
the systems that make those things talk to each other and work well together.
Noor, I hope that that answered your question.
I thought that was a great question.
I say it's not naive because I don't know instinctively what a data architect does.
And I've worked with data architects who do very different things.
I feel like you might have the same title in another company with different functions
and do something totally different.
All righty, well, let's move on to Arsenis.
Arsenis, you had a great question in Slido.
I would love it if you could unmute and ask that.
Yeah, sure.
Thanks, Libby.
Hey.
Hey, so thank you, Kieran and Jonathan, for joining us today and chatting with us.
My question is more for Kieran on this because you mentioned having used S when R
was S, and I like the history of these languages quite a lot.
So my question is, what are some of the developments in R that most stand out to
you versus kind of the original S that maybe a lot of people might not be aware
of or might've missed, and what are some of the developments that you hope to see
in the language in the future?
Boy, yeah, there's a lot.
I mean, it's like 30 years and more of development kind of that is behind that.
One of the things that changed is that you used to be able to use the underscore
character as the assignment operator, which made for really terrible readability for
code, and thankfully that went away.
I think that it's in the character of R as a language to be constantly trying out
new things within a sort of more or less structured overall community of the core
developers and the wider world.
And so in effect, what you have with R always is this kind of like these stratigraphic
layers of previous efforts to develop aspects of the language, not all of which hang
together very well.
And so that was the main reason, I guess, that sort of Tidyverse and the whole place
that Posit eventually can be traced back to, that was a real revolution in the
usability of R for kind of people coming to data science broadly construed or data
analysis, statistical data analysis for the first time.
Not that there weren't sort of strictly speaking, there weren't that many things
that you literally couldn't do before Tidyverse tools came along.
But the harmonization that it brought really was a big step forward and sort of
helped streamline things a little bit with all of the usual kind of trade-offs and
caveats that come with that kind of development.
And then the other big development, I think, going back to what Jonathan was talking
about in his role, has kind of been in many ways the tooling, right, whether it's
IDEs specifically, but then also kind of the ease with which R can talk to other aspects
of general computing has really improved a great deal.
So I'm not a software developer, although I do write R packages from time to time.
And so I don't have extremely strong views on where the language should go or where the
tooling should go. That's kind of not my area.
But I do feel like the language as it exists now and the tooling as it exists now is just
so much better than what we had in the past.
And we'd like to see that sort of continue both in terms of its sort of flexibility while
maintaining its core strengths, which have always been sort of it's the language that's
built for data analysis at its core and builds into it kind of abstractions like the
humble data frame that a lot of other languages kind of have to work a lot harder to
integrate into how they work.
And so between that and if we can continue on that path and maintain the sort of really
vibrant kind of community that R has always had, then we'll be in good shape, I think.
Something that Kieran said when I first talked to him that really stood out to me was
something about like, you know, everyone's kind of worried about Positron, like, oh, it
changes scary. Right.
But when you've seen things progress over a large number of years from S to R, you've seen
all of these changes happen.
You're a lot less afraid of change because you know that it happens.
Change happens. Stuff gets better over time.
And it was such a positive outlook.
Yeah, I mean, he's been around long enough.
There's after a while you do you do feel like the sort of negative version of that is saying
you don't want to turn into sort of a cranky old man yells at cloud.
Anytime some new thing comes along, I'm real mad about it.
In almost all of these cases, you know, something comes along and changes.
It offers some advantages.
Some people will seize on that and take advantage of it.
Other people will be like, well, things work fine the way they are for me.
So if it's not broke, don't fix it.
But there's room within the overall kind of space of the language and of languages and
tools generally for exactly that sort of range of reactions.
It doesn't mean that kind of, you know, people are going to be sort of forced down one road
rather than another. There's generally kind of a lot of heterogeneity that can persist for a
very long time, even in the context of kind of innovation and change.
Right. And good things are coming always.
It doesn't change, doesn't have to be terrible.
Well, there was a little discussion going on in the chat that I wanted to call out because
Zach asked to the chat, like, hey, what do S&R even stand for?
Like is S for statistics?
I have always thought, yes, S is like loosely for statistics.
And for anybody who is curious, my understanding of R, which is reflected in the comments
here, is that Ross and Robert were the two guys who were working on this.
And so they both start with R.
And then, of course, it was S before.
So let's call it another single letter.
Great question, Zach, for the chat.
And if you ever have any questions for Zach.
And also S by analogy to C.
Yeah, there we go.
Because they come out of Bell Labs.
They both come out of Bell Labs.
It's C for computing and S for statistics.
OK, awesome. If you have any questions for the chat, by the way, that are not for Kieran or
Jonathan, do exactly what Zach did, put it in the chat and say, hey, question for chat.
All right. Great, great question so far.
Let's see, what have we got over in Slido?
Alan, you had a great question.
Would you like to unmute and ask that?
I will highlight it here in Slido for us so we can all see it.
Oh, OK, I can't, OK, I can't.
Oh, there he is.
Am I, am I?
You're here, you're a robot for a second, but you're better.
Good. Yeah, my question for Jonathan.
But I also have to say, hi, Kieran, it's been a long time.
It's really fun to see. We should catch up.
Jonathan, I'm, I'm curious.
We talk a whole lot and Kieran just mentioned tooling.
We talk a whole lot about software development, software engineering, informing data
science. And we see that in practices and, you know, deployment and methods and tools
and stuff. I'm curious if on the software development side, if you see data science
practices, methods like informing, making software better.
I've started thinking a lot about, like, what are we what are we pushing back into
software development that might be interesting that that that that we don't see from
the from the data side or from that from the data science side?
I'm curious if being at RStudio, Posit, a long time, if that's informing the way you
think about software development.
So I'll kind of answer in three parts here, so, so for the first two, I think that there
has been limited flow in the other direction, probably less than less than you might
hope. But there are a variety of things that are valuable when doing data science that
have leaked back in the software engineering world, especially for people who work on
software that does data science.
But I will say that like having been part of both communities, like a lot of the back
flow that I'm seeing is around like number one around iteration.
Right. So like the when you when you develop software, like it is a very iterative
process, right? Like, you know, like almost nobody, even in the age of LLMs, can one
shot an application.
Right. And so one thing you notice when you watch data scientists work is how iterative
that work is, like especially when they're doing exploratory data analysis, like that
process of like iterating, like testing, like there's a there's a loop here, right,
that you're doing as as you iterate on your and explore your data.
And that mechanism or like the tools that you use to explore that space are similar to
the tools that you use at a philosophical level when you're exploring the software
space. It's like if you watch software engineers kind of explore a new space, if
they've been informed by data science, you can watch them do kind of the same iterative
approach. The second is in reproducibility.
Right. So one of the things that matters a lot to data scientists is making sure that
the work they do is fully reproducible.
Like this is one of the original goals of doing code first data science is that it
generates an artifact, you know, that anybody can use to verify your analysis.
You know, and I'm very fortunate to work in the world of software engineering in open
source software, where one of the core values we have at Posit is we want to make our
software reproducible in the same way that the data science are doing with the software
is reproducible. Right.
So, you know, we publish the source code to pretty much everything that we do.
I can make sure that anybody can kind of build and verify copies of our software.
We make sure that the environment in which we build the software is documented and
available to people. So those are those are kind of two examples of practices that have
kind of crossed the boundary or kind of co-evolved in these two separate communities.
And then the third one is simply that, like, as we make software for data science, you
know, and I'll probably talk about this a bit more in my keynote, but that that software
is informed by the data science community and is built differently than people who are
writing software for software engineers.
These two communities have some similar needs, but also some that are some that are quite
different. So, yeah, not a whole lot of crossover, but a lot of co-evolution and
certainly some ideas have leaked over.
Wonderful. Thank you for that great question, Alan.
All righty. My next question that I wanted to ask, oh, all my Slido questions just moved
one one minute here.
All right, Lisa, you had a question for Kieran.
Would you like to unmute and ask that?
Sure. Lots of you hear me, too.
Yeah. Yeah.
Hi, Kieran.
Great to sort of meet you.
I think I've read a book or two of yours maybe on DataVis.
So I'm super curious how to successfully move industry folks from tables of numbers to
visualizations. And by the way, I'm not anti-tables.
I just think, you know, let's say a 20 by 100 table of numbers.
I sort of question what anyone is getting from that.
So is the is the problem kind of just habits, you think, or are or is it sort of perceived
differences in the information that's being conveyed that that's behind that resistance?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I was kind of hoping maybe your sociologist brain would have the answer.
Why are they so resistant?
I think people keep disagreeing with me that, yeah, I think that there is, well, you know.
There's a lot of. Habit makes a big difference to how organizations work, and established
practice is very hard to shift, even for good reasons.
And and I will say that, like, you know, one of the so-called, you know, one of the things
that I've learned is that, you know, data visualization as a as a technique is is great.
And it has, you know, I'm all in favor of it.
And I think in a world where we're giving sort of talks with sides all the time, it's
much more effective in conveying what it is that you that you want to show than presenting
a slide full of numbers, for example, can be.
I I'll say two things about about sort of resistance.
One is that because if people have been doing it for a long time, it doesn't just mean that
they're entrenched. It also, you know, for sort of negative reasons, it also means that
their skills are oriented towards interpreting that artifact like a table, that thing.
I remember very, very strongly one of my kind of early experiences being trained just as
a social scientist was encountering people, advisors and teachers who could just look
at a table like of models or statistical data or summaries and see things kind of
immediately in the table because they've been looking at them for years and they would
just kind of put their finger like, look, that that coefficient there, what something
is wrong with that, you know, that standard error or whatever it is like they would they
just had that ability. And it was because they'd looked at like thousands of these
things, hundreds of thousands of these things over a very long time.
And so then if you're asking people to shift from that habit to sort of some new skill,
then that can be that that can be tricky.
And they too were raised in a you know, those people were trained in a world where people
weren't presenting to audiences in a it was it was instead, you know, here's here's
the here's the paper and a handout maybe that you could sort of look at for a while
while the talk was being given as opposed to a world of slides.
And so so then tables of data translate quite poorly to
slides for that kind of person.
One of the things that I.
Emphasize a lot, and it's also something that people don't grasp all that
straightforwardly when they're learning data visualization, is that an awful lot of
visualization that that we do, in effect.
Is structured the way that a table is structured, this is true of kind of small
multiples, but also even simple things like like a huge amount of time, we have kind of
some sort of we have some sort of continuous measure, a number and some sort of
category broken out by some sort of set of categories, whether it's, you know, scores
by country or by state or divisions of an organization or sales categories, whatever
it is, and then some quantity associated with those.
And one of the simplest things you can do that's extremely underrated and very effective
for visualizations is to try and turn your visualization into something more like a
table that people can read.
Often, that's as simple as put the categorical stuff on the Y axis and not the X axis, so
people don't have to turn their heads or, you know, to waste your time sort of figuring
out how to put the labels at 45 degrees so that they're that they're readable.
And instead, put the continuous quantity on the X axis and put the put the categorical
quantity on the Y axis.
And then suddenly it's just a table again, except that now there are dots or lengths
which are easy to to grasp.
And so the I think the I think the similarities between tabular layouts and and graphs are
easy to underestimate and that one way to get people who are used to looking at tables
of numbers to over to the visualization stuff is to help them realize that effective
visualizations are often just tables of visual quantities rather than just tables of
numbers and are easy to easier to read for that reason.
I love it.
There's so much good conversation happening in the chat, if you are watching this or
listening to this later and you're not here live in the chat, you're missing so much
because we have a community full of really smart and talented individuals who are giving
us all of their their takes.
Some of my takes are if you have somebody who can't let go of a table, you could do
color mapped tables where bigger values have a different color or or something like
that. I it's a go between at least.
Right. So you can see visually as your values diverge.
All right. Awesome question, Lisa.
Thank you so much.
Let's go to Zach's question.
And Zach has an asterisk in his.
That means Libby, ask it for me.
So this is for Jonathan, I think.
What? Oh, Jonathan, this is the question you've been dreading.
Are you ready? What are your long term goals with Positron and do you think it might
eventually replace RStudio?
I did know someone was going to ask this.
Thanks, Zach. It's a great question.
So I'll answer the first part.
So our long term goals for Positron is to really make it the best IDE for working with
data in any language.
So Positron is built in such a way that the R and Python subsystems that we added to
Positron are just extensions.
Right. So if you think about the again, I'm an architect.
Think about the overall way the Positron is composed.
We built it so that anybody can write a plug in for like a new language or new
capabilities to Positron.
So like Positron as a core is going to have the really like first class, like
hopefully best in the world at being like a data science workbench that will be
extensible to new languages and new capabilities over time and continue to evolve
as the industry does.
So for the second part of that question, is this eventually going to replace RStudio?
The answer is probably not.
So a couple of things to keep in mind here.
So the first is that Positron is not and will never be a superset of RStudio.
So it does not have all of RStudio's features.
It won't ever have all the features that are currently in RStudio.
And it makes a different set of tradeoffs.
So like I want you to think about things that are more general and then more
specific, like you can get a lot more power and capability if you're willing to make
your tool fit for a very specific use.
You can also get a lot more breadth for your tool at the expense of making it like a
little bit awkward for more specific use cases.
And this is one of the things we're really wrestling with as we develop Positron is,
there are people that are coming from RStudio or from VS Code or PyCharm or Dataspot
or whatever, and people who are using their tools in a very deep way, it's difficult
to make one tool, one generic data workbench that serves all these very specific
needs without turning into a very complicated piece of software.
So RStudio is very, very fit.
It's evolved almost like a river rock, just smoothed out by decades of work to
be very, very good at specific R-based workflows.
And honestly, even as someone who has worked on Positron for years now, I don't
think Positron will ever be as good as RStudio for those specific use cases, simply
again, because you can't take something so generic and make it work as well as
something that is fit for a more specific purpose.
So we think if you work for R and Python together or just Python, you'll be a lot
happier in Positron because it's so much better at multi-language stuff.
It has much deeper ID capabilities because it's built on VS Code.
A couple of people in the chat have pointed that out.
And also, we are continuing to invest in RStudio with a lot of the ideas that we
have germinated in Positron.
So if, for example, if you use a really recent build of RStudio, you'll notice
that it has much better treatment for errors and warnings and messages in the
console, which is basically derived and pioneered from work that we did in
Positron.
Same thing, for example, we're building some tools for R that run inside of
Positron, and we're pulling those tools back into RStudio to improve the R
experience there.
One of those tools, for example, is called AIR.
It's an incredibly fast code formatter and server for the R language.
And it's native in Positron, but also you can now hook it up to RStudio in a recent
release to have it format your R code beautifully every time you save it.
So we're seeing a lot of cross-pollination between the IDEs, which we think is
great.
Kieran Healy & Jonathan McPherson Data Science Hangout, positron, rstudio
Kieran Healy & Jonathan McPherson Data Science Hangout, postron, rstudio
Well, it's Williams iPad, I believe.
Okay, he's there.
I see him with his awesome shark background as usual.
Okay.
I did just ask to unmute Bill.
He's working on it.
He's on zoom on the iPad, which is a little bit trickier.
We have to ask.
Oh, there we go.
Sorry about that.
And Karen don't feel bad about us.
I used APL which was done in the 60s.
So, yeah, it's okay.
My question really revolves around the way people approach things in terms of
the visualizations and the data that they're doing in that, you know, if
we did it the way we should characteristically as a data science
group, we let the data tell us what it is, but what I've seen recently
and recently being the last few years people are starting with answers.
And typically, well, that's not an evil thing to do.
It slants how everything goes particularly the visualizations.
And are you seeing that with all the work that you've been doing?
I think that well first I have I have used APL a tiny bit because one of my
former colleagues Ron Breger used to use to use it.
Imagine a language for those who don't know it consisting entirely of
operators.
It's amazing, amazingly compact, but it's one of those write once read
never languages.
I think the thing you identify is a real issue for data analysis
generally.
I think it's kind of a chronic issue in the sense that there's no sort of
sin you can commit with graphs or with data visualizations that you can't
also commit with tables or models if sinning is what you want to do.
And I say, you know, and it's not something that like it's a feature,
but it is something that's kind of can tend to be supercharged by the
power that data visualization gives, although in much the same way again
that it can be supercharged by the immense sort of power of the data
analysis tools that we have generally.
I think there let me let me pick out sort of two reasons that that sort of
thing happens across both visualization and statistical modeling generally.
One is that the most general one is that when we're looking at data, we're
looking for patterns and humans are pattern recognizing creatures.
We're very good at finding patterns and we're often motivated in data
visualization to find patterns.
We want them to be there whether that's because we're an academic wanting to
write a paper that has an interesting finding or that you're in industry and
you're looking for looking for something that you want to sort of pitch or
explain or like you want to find that pattern and and half of the reason that
statistical techniques exist is to sort of slow your role a little bit and give
you criteria that are not just kind of I think this looks like it's real and
and so we really do need to that.
That's why when I said at the beginning that I was a little suspicious or it
tended to make me a little bit queasy that phrases like storytelling with data
kind of, you know, bring me out in hives just a little bit is because they tend
if you misunderstand the intent behind them, they can encourage you to just
kind of well, I've got a yarn.
I want to tell and I'm just going to look at you know, for the things that
help me tell that yarn and a compelling way and a graph or a table is something
that you know, or a fancy moss fancy statistical model is something that can
help you tell that yarn even if it's not supported by the by what but by the
data in there and so data in that sense never tells you what it is all by itself.
It our jobs would be a lot easier if the data just transparently represented
itself to us in a truthful manner.
So we're committed to finding things and to look to look for things but you
know, we have to sort of we have to be constrained in some way and then the
second thing I would say is that one of the things both again both in data
visualization and I think in the whole business of the whole world of modeling
data statistically on the whole it that we see at IC again and again is out in
the world and in classrooms with students and wherever else is that is
that there's a again understandable but real tendency for people to say to
themselves to begin by saying like what's the most complicated thing I know
how to do and and and start there like I'm going to do that whether that's
some fantastically complicated, you know multidimensional graph that that they
can write ggplot code to produce because it has the capacity to do it or it's
some fantastically complex statistical model that maybe you're not quite sure
how to interpret but you know that that's the thing that you're supposed to
in some sense supposed to do people often go immediately for that like that
for I want I want to find a pattern and I want it sort of validated by the most
complicated or technically sophisticated thing that I know how to do and very
often the advice that you are warning that I end up giving people a lot of the
time get people sort of want to resist it but because they say look I want to
do the fancy thing I want to do the hard thing why are you telling me just look
at the simplest thing first and then see where I should go next and so it's
those kind of you know it's that sort of advice that you end up trying to trying
to get across to people that often simpler is better or you know don't
don't overextend yourself too early when you're looking at data and that and
that's true for any kind of analysis no matter how you're presenting it but I
think it is true that it's something that you know complex or beautiful
visualizations can and can encourage and and can make it out the door because
they're because they look so so great visualization is maybe sort of more
prone to those kinds of problems than other approaches but but it's not unique
to visualization by any means awesome thank you Karen all right we have less
than 15 minutes left because somehow 45 minutes has flown by so let's move on to
another question and Mike you had a great question would you like to unmute
and ask that
yep so I hope people can hear me this is question for Jonathan I wanted to first
of all say thank you for all the developments in our studio IDE over the
years and you know things like our markdown notebooks have really
transformed many people's ways of working and so what if I'm allowed a
kind of like have two-part question first part is what are you most excited
about that's coming in either our studio IDE or positron and also the second part
is how do you balance features for power users and ease of use for beginners
those are the two great questions so I'll talk first about what we're most
excited about and I almost hate to say this because everyone's excited about
this right now but we are excited about AI integration quite a lot one of the
things I've been working on it more than anything in the past couple of months is
integrating a an AI assistant into positron so we have not really shared or
demo much about that yet but you'll be you'll be hearing it quite a lot about
it in the months to come there are there are so many places in an IDE where an AI
can provide like really good feedback if you if you've ever used like you know
github copilot or cursor or like windserver into these in these IDEs as
like as these tools are primarily used today by software engineers, but the
really cool thing about using them in an IDE like positron is that they have that
is that you get they have access not only to the like that the state of your
project in terms of code, but also the state of your data as I can as I can in
memory object that can be manipulated with the result that you can get some
like really like really quick robust analysis going by kind of describing
what you want in natural language and kind of working with the AI kind of hand
in hand to to arrive at a result.
I don't want to get too off into the weeds there, but there's just like quite
a lot of super exciting innovation happening today in the at the nexus of
artificial intelligence and the IDE like not not like we're not that interested
in like replacing, you know human activity like we don't you know, we're
not going to create like some like an agent that you just like run and like
let it go, but we are quite interested in you know, AI assisted operations in
the IDE and there's a lot of a lot of places where that can be really helpful
things like like asking the AI to explain errors like asking it to like, you
know, modify your charts when you forget the ggplot syntax, which I do all the time.
And like asking it to like, you know, help you find outliers asking it to you
know, like help you generate analyses like reports that there's lots of great stuff.
So second part of the question is about making an IDE that works well for both
power users and beginners and I'm going to say that there's actually you know,
this is actually very hard to do.
And at the end of the day, we basically we kind of compromise, you know, that
you can't make an IDE that's perfect for power users and beginners.
So the best thing that we can do is to try to like keep the complexity in a place
where you know, it doesn't show up unless you need it, you know, I've in
these systems, there's usually what I call like a conservation of complexity,
which is to say that like the amount of complexity is constant.
It's sort of like the amount of energy in the universe.
Like there's there's just going to be complexity and you know, you have to
decide, you know, where that complexity goes and you know, how it's accessed and
to like to the best of our capability.
We take that complexity upon ourselves and try to push it like into the IDE as
opposed to exposing users to it.
You know, I think, you know, I think VS Code like does a like the trade-offs
that they've made with respect to this are largely gated toward power users,
right?
So they pretty much hide everything, you know, like they don't have a lot of
menus or toolbars, like it's a very Spartan aesthetic and you access
most tools using the command palette, you know, when people come over for
something like RStudio, which is a little bit more geared for like
beginner use, people who are not accustomed to software development
tools, it's got lots like menus and buttons and you know, other affordances
for getting your work done.
So if you look at the design of an IDE like Positron, you'll find that
it lands somewhere in the middle.
You know, we've added a lot more affordances for things that beginners
are accustomed to while still like preserving like the full power of the
command palette of like a rich set of commands for advanced users that
maybe don't necessarily have all the buttons that beginners are drawn to.
So it's a trade-off.
It's not perfect for everyone, but we try to make sure that that
complexity lands in the right place.
Awesome.
I was just chatting with Mike about this in the chat where he was saying
like, could you have an RStudio IDE or Positron skin that sort of like
hides complexity for newbies?
And I was just thinking, oh yeah, Positron was really overwhelming when
I first started using it because I was not a VS Code user before that.
I had never really liked VS Code.
I'm like, I don't want VS Code.
I want something different.
Why did we do this?
Why is it still VS Code?
This is the worst.
But then I remembered that RStudio was also really overwhelming
when I first started using it.
It's got a billion panes.
There's a bunch of buttons everywhere.
Every pane has like 50 tabs on it.
I'm like, it was so much.
So just remembering that everything is hard when you're bad at it.
Everything is tough when you're new to it and it gets better over time.
You just have to work hard at it and lean on people who can support you.
Fantastic question, Mike.
Thank you for asking as always.
And then I saw a question.
I know we only have five minutes left, but I did like this question so much.
It's from Simon.
Simon, if you are available to unmute and ask this, that'd be great.
It was a question for Kieran.
Sure.
Yeah, thanks Libby.
So Kieran, I read your book, Data Visualization, a few years ago.
It was handed to me by a coworker who we've been trying to onboard folks
to using R or Python scripting languages to build data visualizations
and open that up as like the broader world of data analysis.
And so I liked your approach as like, hey, let's start people with plotting
so they can get to see these results.
And so I wonder if you still like that approach for getting people
into the world of analysis.
Thank you.
Yeah, I do.
Yeah, I'm in the middle of writing a second edition of the book
that's trying to sort of do the same thing again.
One of the reasons, this is kind of right at the center of kind of things
Jonathan was just talking about it and Libby too and the questions.
There's, if you're learning how to do this stuff with data science
broadly construed, then you have to learn how to do statistics.
You have to learn the idea of representing stuff for public consumption
in tables or graphs.
You have to learn a computer language, programming language to do that in
and you have to learn some sort of IDE to do it with
and that's just tremendously overwhelming for newcomers.
And it's very hard.
The flip side to what Libby was saying about how everything is hard
when you're bad at it is for experts, it's what sort of the psychologist
called the curse of knowledge, right?
That once you know something, it's very hard to imagine not knowing it.
And that makes things like sort of getting people to,
onboarding people to new tools for people who already know how they work.
It's very difficult to teach them, to teach new people
because you forget yourself that, you know, what it's like not to know something.
Data visualization is really handy as a way in because it can help you get past
this feeling that you have to know everything before you can do anything.
In coding.
And so I really do feel like the combination, in R specifically too,
the combination of pipeline approaches to coding, first this and then and then
and then and then, which leads naturally to sort of thinking in terms of
functional programming, but you don't know that that's what it is first,
combined with the idea of kind of doing a series of minor small analyses
that emit a graph you can see immediately and understand
and interpret is a really powerful way, right?
You know, to get people, you know, up the steepest part of the learning curve
by because then you can revisit.
Okay.
What is this?
What does this analysis mean?
Or what is this?
What can we do?
That's more complicated and so on, but all in the context of, you know, just
giving people the reward of saying, oh, look, I produced this thing that you
can actually show to somebody else and it looks good and it's understandable
and it makes sense.
I think I think for that reason, data visualization is a very handy way
to introduce people, not just to, you know, the business of data analysis,
but to the whole ecosystem that's required now to do, you know, the
whole enchilada of IDs, code, software, and the file system and all the
rest of it.
Yeah.
Yeah, as Mina says, let them eat the cake first, right?
Like let them get the beautiful thing first.
Well, thank you so much, Karen.
That was an amazing answer.
I totally agree.
I think that teaching plotting is like the first step to everybody
understanding even what the concept of tidy data is.
I have two minutes left on the clock.
I want to ask each of you a lightning round question, which is one piece
of career advice that you have found valuable or that you think other
people should know and do it as quick as possible because we have two
minutes on the clock.
Jonathan, hot seat.
Do you have anything on your mind?
For a career advice specifically, career advice, I think, you know,
the just being humble and curious is the best advice I ever got, you
know, that's it's very simple, but like being humble and curious and
just like nice to people that you work with, it sounds so simple, but
it's very powerful.
Fully agree.
Couldn't agree more.
Thanks, Jonathan.
Karen, how about you?
I would just I would just say that an elaboration of the curse of
knowledge thing that I just said, once you know something, it's real
hard to imagine not knowing it.
So don't forget that people who don't know things don't know it yet.
And when you're trying to explain something to somebody or learn it
yourself.
Or learn it yourself.
Yep, be kind to everybody and yourself.
And I think that this translates to if you built it, maybe don't write
the docs for it because you know too much about it and your docs are
going to be Swiss cheese and full of holes.
All right, everybody.
Thank you so much to Karen and Jonathan.
This was so much fun having you both.
I cannot wait to hear your keynote talks at PositConf and everybody.
I'm so excited to see you today.
Thank you for being in the chat.
If you would like to save the chat and you're still here.
There are three dots in the top of your chat window where you can click
that and then click save chat that will let you save all of the resources
that everybody has shared and we hope that you stay with us next week
to next week.
We're going to have Toby Hall EVPNCIO at Delta Dental of Michigan.
Thanks Karen and Jonathan.